# Nepal's constitutional crisis and India's role
#international-relations #seedling  #Nepal 
Nepal has an unstable domestic polity faced with civil society movements such **Jan Andolan 1 & 2**. Jan Andolan 2 was led by the Maoists and India played an important roke in bringing all athe conflicting stakeholders on the negotiating table, signing of  the [[Comprehensive peace agreement]]. India also provided active support to the constituent assembly and expected the constitution of Nepal to reflect the interest of all the stakeholders. It was expected to be a **consensus document**. However, following its prmulgation, a political crisis broke out in Nepal with Madheshis, Tharus and other janjatis accusing the new constitution of marginalising them and not providing them with adequate representation. Their grievances include:
1. Rather than creation of ethnic provinces, vertical provinces were carved out which divided Madheshis into different provinces, reducing them to minority in all the provinces. 
2. In the upper house, equal representaion to all provinces was given, rather than it being proportional.
3. In the lower house, more seats were reserved for the hills though the majority of Nepalese live in the plains
4. The top constitutional posts were limited to citizens by descent and denied to citizens by naturalization and Most of the Madheshis have naturalized citizenship.
## Impact on India Nepal relations
Unlike the other countries, India didn't congratulate Nepal, rather merely *noted* the enacted of the new constitution. Though the relations had improved following India's immediate response to Nepal after the earthquake, since the constitution did not recognize the interests of the Tarai population, India imposed an unofficial economic blockade along the India Nepal border. The prices of essential commodities such as cooking gas skyrocketed during the four month long economic blockade. As a consequence, India Nepal relations deteriorated, India lost its goodwill with the Nepalese public and its image as a big bullying brother got reinforced.
Nepal, in response, signed a *trade and transit agreement* with China. Also PM Oli, candidate of the left alliance of Nepal won the parliamentary elections on anti-India rhetoric. 
However, in recognition of the geographical limit to the Nepal China relations, Nepal has sought to normalize its relations with India while India has adequately responded to it. PM Oli, continuing with the tradition, visited India as his first state visit, which was followed by Modi's visit to Nepal.
Also, Nepali political elite has sought to alleviate the concerns of the Tarai population through amendment of the constitution such as creation of Tarai state, provision of mixed representation in the upper house etc